migrations/README.md, before:

# DDD Migration System

This directory contains migration workflows for transitioning between different DDD framework versions and structures.

## 📁 Migration Directory Structure

```
docs/migrations/
├── README.md                           # This file - migration system overview
├── migration-tracker.yml              # Tracks completed migrations
├── test-cases-to-features.yml         # TEST-CASES.md → docs/features/ migration
├── legacy-structure-migration.yml     # Legacy → Modern DDD migration
└── templates/
    └── migration.template.yml          # Template for new migrations
```

## 🎯 Migration Tracking System

### **Migration Status Tracking**

All migrations are tracked in `migration-tracker.yml` to prevent duplicate execution:

```yaml
migrations:
  test-cases-to-features:
    status: "completed"
    executed_at: "2025-01-27T10:30:00Z"
    version: "1.0.0"
    checksum: "abc123..."
  legacy-structure:
    status: "pending"
    version: "1.0.0"
```

### **Migration States**

- **`pending`** - Migration available but not executed
- **`running`** - Migration currently in progress
- **`completed`** - Migration successfully completed
- **`failed`** - Migration failed and needs attention
- **`skipped`** - Migration manually skipped (not applicable)

## 🚀 Usage Instructions

### **For LLMs/Agents**

```python
# Check migration status before execution
import yaml

with open('docs/migrations/migration-tracker.yml', 'r') as f:
    tracker = yaml.safe_load(f)

migration_id = "test-cases-to-features"
if tracker['migrations'][migration_id]['status'] == 'completed':
    print(f"Migration {migration_id} already completed - skipping")
else:
    # Execute migration workflow
    execute_migration(migration_id)
```

### **For Manual Execution**

```bash
# Check migration status
python tools/migration_manager.py status

# Execute specific migration
python tools/migration_manager.py run test-cases-to-features

# Mark migration as completed manually
python tools/migration_manager.py complete test-cases-to-features
```

## 📋 Available Migrations

### **1. TEST-CASES.md → Features Migration**
- **File:** `test-cases-to-features.yml`
- **Purpose:** Migrate from separate TEST-CASES.md to merged FT-TC structure
- **Target:** Projects using legacy TEST-CASES.md structure
- **Impact:** High - Changes core documentation structure

### **2. Legacy Structure Migration**
- **File:** `legacy-structure-migration.yml`
- **Purpose:** Migrate from old DDD structure to modern framework
- **Target:** Projects using pre-2025 DDD structure
- **Impact:** High - Updates entire project structure

## 🔧 Migration Workflow Format

Each migration follows this YAML structure:

```yaml
metadata:
  id: "migration-identifier"
  name: "Human Readable Name"
  version: "1.0.0"
  description: "What this migration does"
  
prerequisites:
  - "Condition that must be met"
  - "Another prerequisite"
  
steps:
  - id: "step-1"
    name: "Step Name"
    actions:
      - "Action to perform"
    validation:
      - "How to verify success"
      
rollback:
  - "How to undo this migration"
```

## 🛡️ Safety Features

### **Pre-Migration Checks**
- Verify prerequisites are met
- Check for conflicting changes
- Validate project structure
- Create backup points

### **Rollback Support**
- Each migration includes rollback procedures
- Automatic backup creation before execution
- Step-by-step rollback instructions
- Validation of rollback success

### **Idempotency**
- Migrations can be run multiple times safely
- Status tracking prevents duplicate execution
- Partial completion detection and recovery

## 🔍 Best Practices

### **For Migration Authors**
1. **Always include prerequisites** - Check what must exist before migration
2. **Provide clear rollback** - Every step should be reversible
3. **Validate thoroughly** - Include comprehensive success criteria
4. **Test extensively** - Verify on multiple project types
5. **Document impact** - Clearly state what changes

### **For Migration Users**
1. **Backup first** - Always backup before running migrations
2. **Read documentation** - Understand what the migration does
3. **Check prerequisites** - Ensure your project meets requirements
4. **Validate results** - Verify migration completed successfully
5. **Test thoroughly** - Ensure your project still works

## 📊 Migration History

Track all migrations in your project:

```bash
# View migration history
python tools/migration_manager.py history

# Export migration report
python tools/migration_manager.py report --format yaml
```

## 🚨 Troubleshooting

### **Common Issues**

1. **Migration Already Completed**
   - Check `migration-tracker.yml` status
   - Use `--force` flag to re-run if needed

2. **Prerequisites Not Met**
   - Review prerequisite list in migration file
   - Ensure project structure matches requirements

3. **Partial Migration Failure**
   - Check migration logs for specific step failure
   - Use rollback procedures to restore previous state
   - Fix issues and retry migration

### **Getting Help**

- Review migration-specific documentation
- Check prerequisite requirements
- Examine validation criteria
- Test rollback procedures in safe environment

## 🔮 Future Enhancements

- **Automated migration detection** - Scan project and suggest applicable migrations
- **Migration dependencies** - Support for migration chains and dependencies
- **Interactive migration** - Step-by-step guided migration process
- **Migration templates** - Standardized templates for common migration patterns
- **CI/CD integration** - Automated migration execution in pipelines

Commit message:

🔄 Synchronization Pass: Migration System & Template Restructure
✨ **Migration System Overhaul**
- Replace Python config_migrator with YAML-based DDD Migration system
- Move migrations from docs/migrations/ to migrations/
- Add migration tracking in .agent3d-tmp/migration-tracker.yml
- Create DDD Migration procedure for LLM execution

🗂️ **Template System Reorganization**
- Move templates from templates/ to templates.yml/
- Create comprehensive template index and documentation
- Update all template references across configuration files
- Add template versioning and migration support

⚙️ **Configuration Enhancements**
- Move python_paths from root to project_settings section
- Add LLM-friendly comments to critical configuration sections
- Remove obsolete migration_manager references
- Update template paths to new templates.yml/ location

🔧 **Code Location System Improvements**
- Add relative path format support: path/to/file.py#ClassName.method
- Enhance drift scanner with new validation methods
- Simplify Code Location validation (no complex python_paths needed)
- Add example Code Location in FT-CORE-001

📋 **Documentation & Standards**
- Add .editorconfig awareness to Agent Guidelines
- Update migration documentation and procedures
- Create comprehensive template system documentation
- Add code formatting standards with .editorconfig compliance

🧹 **Consistency Cleanup**
- Remove deleted migration_manager.py from framework_modules
- Update all template directory references
- Ensure migration tracking uses .agent3d-tmp/
- Align all documentation with new structure

**Impact**: Simplified migration system, better template organization,
enhanced Code Location validation, improved LLM guidance

migrations/README.md, after:

# DDD Migrations

This directory contains DDD framework migrations that can be executed to update configurations, migrate data structures, or upgrade framework components.

## 📁 Directory Structure

```
migrations/
├── README.md                           # This file
├── config-template-migration.yml      # Configuration template migration
├── test-cases-to-features.yml        # Test cases to features migration
└── [future migrations]               # Additional migrations as needed
```

**Migration Tracking**: `.agent3d-tmp/migration-tracker.yml`

## 🎯 Migration Tracking System

### **Migration Status Tracking**

All migrations are tracked in `migration-tracker.yml` to prevent duplicate execution:

```yaml
migrations:
  test-cases-to-features:
    status: "completed"
    executed_at: "2025-01-27T10:30:00Z"
    version: "1.0.0"
    checksum: "abc123..."
  legacy-structure:
    status: "pending"
    version: "1.0.0"
```

### **Migration States**

- **`pending`** - Migration available but not executed
- **`running`** - Migration currently in progress
- **`completed`** - Migration successfully completed
- **`failed`** - Migration failed and needs attention
- **`skipped`** - Migration manually skipped (not applicable)

## 🚀 Usage Instructions

### **For LLMs/Agents**

```python
# Check migration status before execution
import yaml

with open('docs/migrations/migration-tracker.yml', 'r') as f:
    tracker = yaml.safe_load(f)

migration_id = "test-cases-to-features"
if tracker['migrations'][migration_id]['status'] == 'completed':
    print(f"Migration {migration_id} already completed - skipping")
else:
    # Execute migration workflow
    execute_migration(migration_id)
```

### **For Manual Execution**

```bash
# Check migration status
python tools/migration_manager.py status

# Execute specific migration
python tools/migration_manager.py run test-cases-to-features

# Mark migration as completed manually
python tools/migration_manager.py complete test-cases-to-features
```

## 📋 Available Migrations

### **1. TEST-CASES.md → Features Migration**
- **File:** `test-cases-to-features.yml`
- **Purpose:** Migrate from separate TEST-CASES.md to merged FT-TC structure
- **Target:** Projects using legacy TEST-CASES.md structure
- **Impact:** High - Changes core documentation structure

### **2. Legacy Structure Migration**
- **File:** `legacy-structure-migration.yml`
- **Purpose:** Migrate from old DDD structure to modern framework
- **Target:** Projects using pre-2025 DDD structure
- **Impact:** High - Updates entire project structure

## 🔧 Migration Workflow Format

Each migration follows this YAML structure:

```yaml
metadata:
  id: "migration-identifier"
  name: "Human Readable Name"
  version: "1.0.0"
  description: "What this migration does"

prerequisites:
  - "Condition that must be met"
  - "Another prerequisite"

steps:
  - id: "step-1"
    name: "Step Name"
    actions:
      - "Action to perform"
    validation:
      - "How to verify success"

rollback:
  - "How to undo this migration"
```

## 🛡️ Safety Features

### **Pre-Migration Checks**
- Verify prerequisites are met
- Check for conflicting changes
- Validate project structure
- Create backup points

### **Rollback Support**
- Each migration includes rollback procedures
- Automatic backup creation before execution
- Step-by-step rollback instructions
- Validation of rollback success

### **Idempotency**
- Migrations can be run multiple times safely
- Status tracking prevents duplicate execution
- Partial completion detection and recovery

## 🔍 Best Practices

### **For Migration Authors**
1. **Always include prerequisites** - Check what must exist before migration
2. **Provide clear rollback** - Every step should be reversible
3. **Validate thoroughly** - Include comprehensive success criteria
4. **Test extensively** - Verify on multiple project types
5. **Document impact** - Clearly state what changes

### **For Migration Users**
1. **Backup first** - Always backup before running migrations
2. **Read documentation** - Understand what the migration does
3. **Check prerequisites** - Ensure your project meets requirements
4. **Validate results** - Verify migration completed successfully
5. **Test thoroughly** - Ensure your project still works

## 📊 Migration History

Track all migrations in your project:

```bash
# View migration history
python tools/migration_manager.py history

# Export migration report
python tools/migration_manager.py report --format yaml
```

## 🚨 Troubleshooting

### **Common Issues**

1. **Migration Already Completed**
   - Check `migration-tracker.yml` status
   - Use `--force` flag to re-run if needed

2. **Prerequisites Not Met**
   - Review prerequisite list in migration file
   - Ensure project structure matches requirements

3. **Partial Migration Failure**
   - Check migration logs for specific step failure
   - Use rollback procedures to restore previous state
   - Fix issues and retry migration

### **Getting Help**

- Review migration-specific documentation
- Check prerequisite requirements
- Examine validation criteria
- Test rollback procedures in safe environment

## 🔮 Future Enhancements

- **Automated migration detection** - Scan project and suggest applicable migrations
- **Migration dependencies** - Support for migration chains and dependencies
- **Interactive migration** - Step-by-step guided migration process
- **Migration templates** - Standardized templates for common migration patterns
- **CI/CD integration** - Automated migration execution in pipelines
